Hi, and welcome to the least squares
estimation lecture as part of
the regression course in
the data science specialization.
My name is Brian Caffo and the course
is co-taught by myself, Jeff Leek and
Roger Peng and
run the department of Biostatistics in
the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School
of Public Health.
Consider again,
when we're looking at the scatter plot of
the parent's heights by the child's
heights from the Galton data.
Here remember, the size of
the circle represents the frequency
of that particular x, y combination.
We'd like to use the parent's heights
to explain the child's heights and
we're going to do it
using linear regression.
We're going to use our notation that
we developed in our last lecture.
So let's let Y be the ith child's height
and Xi be the ith's parents height.
Now we want to find the best line, where
we want the line to look like child's
height is an intercept, which let's
label beta nought plus the parent's
height times a slope,
which we're going to label beta one.
So beta nought and
beta one are parameters that we would
like to know that we don't know.
Well, we need a criteria for
the term best.
We need to figure out what we mean
by the best line that fits the data.
Well, one criteria is the famous
least squares criteria.
And the basic gist of the equation is we
want to minimize the sum of the squared
vertical distances between the data
points, the height of the data points,
the child's heights and the points
on the line, on the fitted line.
And we can write this as summation Yi,
the child's heights minus
beta nought plus beta 1Xi,
where that particular parent's heights
would put them on the fitted line.
We'll go through this a lot and
hopefully, you'll get the hang of it.
And then later on at the end of
the lecture, I'll actually show you
the math of how we can come up with the
solution for those that are interested.
Let's talk about what our
equations mean with a picture.
Here's a dataset.
What our least squares
criteria to find the best re,
regression line is going to do is,
it's going to take each point.
So for example,
take this point right here.
That's the point x1, y1 and
this might be the point x2,
y2 and this might be the point xn, y,n.
It's going to take all these points and
fit a line through the data.
Let's draw our line right here, it's
going to fit a line through the data and
the way it's going to pick this line is,
it's going to take, for example, our x1,
y1 point.
It's going to calculate that distance and
that distance is y1, the height,
that height, minus the point on the line.
So this line,
let's assume has intercept beta nought.
So beta nought is the height
on along the vertical
axis has intercept beta nought and
slope beta one.
So that's the line that
we're interested in,
so this point right there is
beta nought plus beta 1X1.
This distance,
then is subtracting the two.
And because that can either be positive or
negative, it would be negative in this
case we square it and then we do that for
every point on the line and add them up.
So, each point on the line
contributes equally to
the error between the line and
the fitted points.
Then we try to minimize that error and
that's what the least squares
criteria is doing for us.
So let's discuss what the answer is
when you perform this model fit.
So just to reiterate, we want the line
y equal to beta nought plus beta 1X.
And we're going to fit it through
a scatter plot of points Xi,
Yi, where Yi is the outcome.
We put little hats over beta nought and
beta one to indicate the estimated values.
The solution works out to be beta one
hat is the correlation between Y and
X times the standard deviation of Y
divided by the standard deviation of X.
The estimated intercept beta nought hat
is Y bar minus beta 1 hat times X bar.
So let's go through a couple of
consequences of this being the result.
First of all,
beta 1 hat has the units of Y divided
by the units of X, that's it's units.
We can see this because the correlation
is a unitless quantity.
Standard deviation of Y
has the units of Y and
standard deviation of
X has the units of X.
So because the line, remember is, so
because the slope of a line is
change in Y divided by change in X,
it has to have units of Y
divided by units of X units.
Another important point is that the line
always passes through the point,
X bar, Y bar.
We can see that for
the equation for the intercept.
If we rearrange it,
we simply get Y bar equals beta
nought hat plus beta 1 hat X bar.
So, if we plug in X bar into our equation
for our fitted line, we get Y bar out,
which means that the line has to
pass through the point X bar, Y bar.
If we reverse the roll of Y and
X and treat X as the outcome and
Y as the predictor,
then we simply get the answer that
the slope of this line is the correlation
times the standard deviation of X
divided by the standard deviation of Y.
So you get a different answer, of course,
when you fit X as the outcome and
Y as the predictor than if you fit Y
as the outcome and X as the predictor.
The slope is the same if you
were to center the data first.
In other words, take each Xi and
subtract off its average, take each Yi and
subtract off its average, so that now the
origin is exactly the mean of the data.
And if you were to do regression
forcing the line through the origin,
you get the same answer.
I would also note that if you normalize
the data, don't just center it, but
center it and scale it.
The slope is exactly the correlation,
because the standard deviation
of the X variable is one.
The standard deviation of
the y variable is one.
And so we can see,
just from the equation for
the slope,
that it will just be correlation.